Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Elsprague De Camp's career as a writer of science fiction and fantasy is in its fifth
decade.
He started back in the late 1930s in the pulp magazines and has written continuously ever
since.
His collaborations with Fletcher Pratt occupy an important place in the body of his work.
Among others, these would include the Harold Shea stories, the incomplete enchanter, the
castle of iron, and wall of serpents.
Another of his better known books is Less Darkness Fall, an account of a modern man
who ends up in sixth century Rome trying to keep civilization alive as barbarism sweeps
Europe.
In recent years, the camp has gotten involved in the Conan stories of Robert E. Howard and
has written some rousing sword and sorcery.
We asked the camp to recall for us his beginnings as a writer.
He wrote a couple of stories and I used to come in once twice in New York and I'd stay
at the park and sit up late and plot a couple of these.
I gave him some help with them.
He sent them to a man named Hermane and the editor of the stounding and I saw that he
could do it.
Why can't I?
So having plenty of time and time and I wrote a couple and sent them in.
To my surprise, they were all.
I continued to sell an occasional story to the pulp magazines while working at his regular
store.
Then something happened to change him into a full time writer.
At the end of 1939, one of the editors on the Craze Journal in New York got fired in an
economy purge.
I was in the office and I was in the office and I was in the office and I was in the
and I was in the office and I was in the office and I was in the office and I was in the office
and in freelancing I heard about as much as I had been doing and I could be my own and
work at my own pace.
Work sitting down and working out all my old clothes.
I was a couple of temporary jobs and I was in the second war and I was at the Naval
Reserve.
I've been at it for a sense.
The camp is a professional writer in the truest sense of the word.
He writes almost books on engineering to the definitive history of the Scopes trial,
the biography of Charles Darwin for juveniles.
Of course, remember that although people generally refer to me as the science fiction writer,
the reason is mainly that I made my early reputation in that field.
Actually, fiction is only about half of my output, rest being science, history, biography,
literary, and so on.
And of the fictional half, besides five historical novels that I've written,
about half is science fiction and strict sense, and half is fantasy.
It's only about a quarter of my output is really science fiction and strict sense.
More on El Sprague to Camp next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The show is about the science fiction,
the science fiction.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show. Stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your ho...
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
Humor is not common in science fiction and fantasy.
That's understandable.
Traditionally, science fiction is concerned with spaceships, aliens, high adventure,
so much adventure and excitement that humor would seem out of place.
But noted science fiction and fantasy author El Sprague to Camp,
thinks that humor and science fiction can mix very well.
Well, all I can say is that it is true that there aren't a great many humorous stories in that field.
But then of course there aren't a great many humorous stories in any genre of fiction.
Some people, some people do it and some people don't.
Now back in before the first world, the second world war, pardon me, I'm not that old quite yet,
but before the second world war, of the active science fiction writers in the country,
there were only two who were considered humorous science fiction writers.
And I was one and Henry Kutner was the other.
Curiously enough, both Henry and I in our private lives were rather serious solemn fellows.
Much of the Camp science fiction and fantasy is humorous.
In one of the Harold Shea stories collected in the incomplete enchanter,
the Camp delights in constructing episodes that show the incongruity of a 20th century man
trying to survive in the world of Spencer's Fairy Queen.
There's some funny stuff in there.
At one point, Shea and his companions are captured by the blatant beast
who threatens to devour them if they don't entertain them by resetting an epic.
But all the epic Shea starts to recite such as Beowulf, the blatant beast already knows.
In desperation, Shea launches into the ballad of Eskimo Nell, a body drinking song that goes on forever.
In the first place, Shea is mortified by having to recite such a thing in front of his female companion,
but the blatant beast lets his captives go and walks off slowly into the woods shaking its monstrous head.
It's ridiculously incongruous, of course, and it can't maintain that's where the humor comes from.
One of the basic elements of humor in my estimation is the element of surprise or incongruity.
In other words, a derby hat on a London businessman is not funny because they all wear them.
But a derby hat on Trudy, a Caesar is, you see, because it's incongruous.
And that is a very considerable factor in humor.
We asked to camp if there was anything that wouldn't mix well with humor.
Maybe heroic sword and sorcery material like the Conan stories.
Well, you couldn't get the same effect that Robert Howard did with his Conan,
because in Robert Howard's original Conan stories there is hardly any humor.
Only in a couple of stories is there a faint gleam of it here and there.
And when I collaborate with President Day-Colon's stories, let us say Carter,
why he has to call me down now and then because I just have a natural tendency to stick a little humor in now and then.
I've been doing it so long it comes natural, but it should not be done because it spoils the general effect.
Now, as for my own stories in that genre, well, I have no hesitation about putting in humor in and putting humor in.
And my heroes are in general not supermen.
They have to be pretty able fellows, but I try to make them realistic.
That is with the usual assortment of virtues and vices and strengths and weaknesses.
Because that's the kind of character that I personally find it easier to believe in when I read it.
Humor takes many forms in the camp's work.
He can use gentle satire, for instance, in a book like The Great Fetish.
And don't forget his collection of humorous bar room tall tales done with Fletcher Pratt, tales from Gavagan's Bar.
We're seeing more humor in science fiction today.
I suspect L. Sprague the Camp's influence is being felt.
More next time on L. Sprague the Camp.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
So, let's get started.
So, stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
One of the most successful collaborations in the field of science fantasy was the team of Fletcher Pratt and L. Sprague the Camp.
During the late 30s and through the 40s, they wrote a series of humorous stories about a young man named Harold Shea.
Shea theorizes that there are an infinite number of worlds that exist all around us.
And he finds a way to get to them using symbolic logic.
He visits a number of fantastic places.
The world of Norse mythology, for instance, and the world of Spencer's Fairy Queen.
Sprague the Camp says that a friend named John Clark introduced him to Fletcher Pratt in the late 1930s.
Fletcher was, at that time, an established and active writer, and I was a struggling young pro, you might say.
So, John said to me, hey, Fletcher says he would like to see you. He has an idea for some stories.
So I went around to Fletcher's and he proposed that he and I collaborate on a series of stories based upon this far-out theory that you can slip into any universe you want to by manipulating the symbols of symbolic logic.
I had been studying symbolic logic a little with all its cuter symbols and things.
So, okay, we went to it. And that is how the Five Herald Shea Stories originated.
The Shea Stories appeared in pulp magazines beginning in 1940. They were later collected in three books.
The Incomplete Enchanter, The Castle of Iron, and Wall of Serpents.
The alternate universe as Shea enters are fantasy worlds where magic works, but they're all consistent logical places once you accept their magical framework.
Right. Shea finds out that matches or guns just don't operate in these worlds. The camp says that such consistency is important to fantasy.
Both Fletcher and I had long since agreed that, right from the start, that the most effective is that in writing fantasy, you have to be even more careful about internal consistency than you do in writing a realistic story.
Because the reader's credulity is already stretched like a rubber band, you see, and if you put extra strain on it by having some obvious contradiction, it's going to snap.
At that point, you'll probably stop reading.
The camp explains how he and Pratt came up with their alternate worlds.
Actually, I've always been a very heavy reader. I was reading Darwin's Origin of Species through at the age of seven, you know, and things like that.
And I had a pretty good historical and mythological knowledge, but actually for the roaring trumpet, Fletcher knew a good deal more about that than I because he was an enthusiast for the Northern thing, as William Morris called it,
and belonged to a group that got together in Boston and read Icelandic sagas to each other in the original.
Well, therefore, he was way ahead of me in the matter of Norse mythology.
Then the second story was laid in the world of Spencer's Fairy Queen, and I had never read the Fairy Queen, so I sat down and beautifully plowed right through it.
I never did have quite the enthusiasm for it. That Fletcher did. I found it pretty tedious for long stretches, but nevertheless, he thought highly of it.
And he went through it. And then for the third one, why we... I knew something about Oriostos Orlando Frioso, although I'd never read it through, but it wasn't very difficult to get hold of a set and read him.
And that furnished the material layer. Well, then we... After the Second World War, we sent Harold to the world of the Finnish Kalevala,
and that was simply a matter of getting the Everyman's Library edition and reading through that and taking notes.
And we finally had him end up where he'd wanted to go all along, which is in the mythological Ireland of Kuhullen and Queen Maeve.
And I already knew a fair amount about that, but I read up some more, so we got the stories.
Next time we'll have more, and I'll sprake the camp.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.